[Document: United Nations]
[Section: Overview and Mission]
The United Nations (UN) is a global intergovernmental organization established by the signing of the UN Charter on 26 June 1945. Its articulated mission is maintaining international peace and security, developing friendly relations among states, promoting international cooperation, and serving as a centre for harmonizing the actions of states in achieving those goals.

[Section: Structure and Membership]
The UN comprises six principal organizations: the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council, the International Court of Justice, the Secretariat, and the Trusteeship Council. These bodies, along with several specialized and related agencies, make up the United Nations System. There are 193 member states (nearly all sovereign states) and two observer states (the Holy See and Palestine).

[Section: Locations and Offices]
The United Nations headquarters is located in New York City. Several other offices are located in Geneva, Nairobi, Vienna, and The Hague.

[Section: Activities and Criticism]
The UN has primarily focused on economic and social development, including supporting decolonization efforts. The UN currently operates 11 peacekeeping missions across the Middle East, Kashmir, Cyprus, Golan Heights, Lebanon, Western Sahara, Kosovo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sudan, South Sudan, and the Central African Republic. The UN has been recognized as a leader in peace and human development and awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. It has also faced criticism for perceived ineffectiveness, bias, and corruption.

[Section: History - Background Pre-1941]
In the century prior to the UN's creation, organizations like the International Committee of the Red Cross were formed. After World War I, leaders including U.S. president Woodrow Wilson advocated for a world body to guarantee peace. The League of Nations was approved and started operations on January 10, 1920, but the United States never joined. The League proved ineffective in the 1930s, failing to act against the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1933 and the Second Italo-Ethiopian War in 1936. When World War II broke out in 1939, the League effectively closed down.

[Section: History - Declarations and Planning (1941-1944)]
The first step toward the UN was the Declaration of St James's Palace on June 12, 1941. The Atlantic Charter, drafted by Roosevelt and Churchill in August 1941, defined post-war goals. Roosevelt coined the term "United Nations" to describe the Allied countries. The Declaration by United Nations was drafted and signed on New Year's Day 1942 by the U.S., U.K., Soviet Union, and China, along with 22 other nations. The October 1943 Moscow Conference resulted in the Four Power Declaration on General Security, calling for a new international organization. The organization's framework was negotiated at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference in September-October 1944, and finalized at the Yalta Conference in February 1945.

[Section: History - Founding (1945)]
The UN Conference on International Organization opened in San Francisco on April 25, 1945, attended by 50 nations. The Charter of the United Nations was completed and signed on June 26, 1945. The UN officially came into existence at 20:07 UTC on October 24, 1945, after ratification by the five permanent members of the Security Council (U.S., U.K., France, Soviet Union, China) and a majority of other nations. The first meetings of the General Assembly and Security Council took place in London in January 1946.


